---
title: 'Fires Everywhere'
date: '2020-11-28'
images:
  [
    thoughts/smoke_sun.jpg,
    thoughts/fires_overview.jpg,
    thoughts/salem_fire.jpg,
    thoughts/truck.jpg,
    thoughts/car_melted.jpg,
    thoughts/burned_house.jpg,
    thoughts/smoke_house.jpg,
  ]
description: 'a reflection of the wildfires in Oregon and California'
blogType: 'blog-post-2'
sources: [{title: 'Beachie Creek Fire', href: 'https://inciweb.nwcg.gov/incident/7001/'},
{title: 'How a 10-acre fire became one of the most devastating wildfires in Oregon history', href: 'https://www.kgw.com/article/news/investigations/beachie-creek-devastating-wildfires-oregon-history/283-d5f85ea2-9aee-4480-b486-f35027c82458'},

{title: 'Why Does California Have So Many Wildfires?', href: 'https://www.nytimes.com/article/why-does-california-have-wildfires.html'},

{title: 'List of California wildfires', href: 'https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_California_wildfires'} ]
---

I was at my mom's house in Salem, Oregon mid-September when I heard gusts of wind clashing against the trees. These 45 mph hour winds blew over a thick haze over the whole town that diminished the sun to a small and blurred flaming dot, causing a shadowy cast mid-day. Naively, I thought the air quality was the worst we were going to get and I was hoping that the wind would keep carrying it West and away from the town. I've never seen a haze so thick and present before. My only experience with any forest fire haze was in SF 2 years ago; you could smell a hint of smoke in the air that caused an N95 mask shortage and the sun gleamed a burnt orange in the sky, but you couldn't see the smoke on the street. This time, I could barely see past the house next door, let alone down the street.

It didn't occur to me at the time that the winds were carrying more than just smoke. To the east of Salem, a fire that was relatively controlled had been burning for the past 2 weeks. It was named the Beachie Creek fire and on September 6th it was estimated to be about 500 acres. On September 7th the winds were 50-75 mph and caused the fire to grow to reach over 130,000 acres in one night with a growth rate of about 2.77 acres per second. (For reference, because I truthfully did not know how large an acre was until now, 1 acre is equivalent to 15 tennis courts, 156 parking spaces, or 75.7% of an American football field). Smoke in the air became a small annoyance in comparison to a larger fear: our home could burn down. Panicked, I made my mom pack a suitcase of clothes and threw some toilet paper and water into the car in case we had to flee. I began obsessively checking the news, looking for evacuation updates in my county and evaluating the fire spread using available visualization maps that looked something like this:

I realized that even if we had to flee I wasn't sure where we would flee to; the fires were everywhere.
This constant checking lasted for 3 nights. The latest news reports were of a small town called Mill City being engulfed in flames. Apparently they had no prior warning to evacuate except for loud banging on their door at midnight right before the fire reached their homes. That was my biggest fear I think: not getting a prior warning to evacuate and then realizing it was too late, forcing you to leave all your belongings to be eaten by the oncoming flames. Each night I would look out my window to see if my neighbors were still in their homes. On that third night we went to bed knowing that there was one larger town (Stayton) between us and the Beachie Creek fire. Stayton was essentially our buffer; if it got swallowed we knew we were going to be next. Luckily, I woke up that next morning to find that the fire had been relatively controlled before reaching Stayton and gratefully was gratefully able to let go of the anxiety that had bunched up inside me the past few days.

As I eased back into a more relaxed state, I started googling "how did this fire start?" Then started wondering if it really mattered how the fire started. I feel like when we find out that a person purposely or accidentally started a fire (gender reveal party lol), we curse humans for being stupid and direct all blame onto them and believe nothing else can be done but at least someone can take responsibility. If we find out it was a natural cause, such as a lightning storm or a power line spark, it creates a bit more fear but we might also come to the conclusion that nothing can be done. "We can't control nature, it was out of our hands."

Unfortunately, the official cause of the Beachie Creek Fire is unknown, but like I said, does it really matter if we can't do anything about it? The more important question that this case highlights is how did these fires grow to be so large and disastrous? Many sources state that the combination of high winds, accumulation of fire fuels, higher population and greater electricity transmission and distribution lines, and climate change caused the Beachie Creek Fire to become one of the most destructive fires in Oregon. The same combination can be said about the fires we have been seeing in California as well. This is the first time I've heard of the term "fire fuels", but many sources believe the accumulation of fire fuels play a major part in the spreading of wild fires lately. Fire fuels are just the phrase used to describe the branches, trees, grasses, shrubs and clutter on the forest floor that are easily flammable. We're seeing a build up of these fuels because we have fought forest fires successfully over the past years (isn't that a good thing??). Yes it's a good thing but it also means that a lot of these branches, trees etc. that would have originally been burnt periodically in these fires are now left to pile up. And the larger the pile up, the farther the fire can spread by devouring the fuels.

The US Forest Service has been trying to put into place the use of prescribed or controlled burns but some of their efforts have been met with some political difficulties (we won't get into that). But even if controlled burns were being carried through smoothly as expected, it's only one of the factors in this combination. The others seem relatively self explanatory: high winds knock over power lines and help the spreading and acceleration of the fires, greater electricity transmission and distribution lines means more power lines could spark and put more homes in danger, but what about climate change?

I know it seems like wildfires are always happening in California and this is nothing new, but there is a very direct link to climate change that is causing the fires to get worse and more unexpected every year. Both Oregon and California had been experiencing severe drought along with temperatures that were two to three degrees warmer than without global warming. This causes the vegetation to dry out and more likely to burn, which means the accumulation of fire fuels is even more of a threat. There is also some active research currently being done on the association between extreme wind events (like the one that caused the Beachie Creek Fire to grow 2.77 acres per second ) with climate change. This essentially means that even if we were to enforce prescribed or controlled burns to remove excess fire fuel from the forest grounds, the combination of drier vegetation and extreme winds/weather is enough to spark and spread fires to a destructive degree on its own without the help of additional fire fuels.

The message we need to understand now is that the fires will keep getting incrementally worse because of global warming. We can see this trend just by looking at the past few years. In all the time my family has lived in Oregon, we have never seen or experienced anything like this. Never in my wildest nightmares did I think that our home would be endangered by wildfires; that was something I thought could only happen in the dry state of California. But we can see this trend in California as well. It may be difficult to tell because wildfires have been threatening the land almost every summer, but the number of acres burned have been increasing year by year. Wildfires have burned more than 4 million acres so far this year (in 2020). Compared to 259,823 acres just last year and 109,529 acres in 2010. If it feels like the fires in California has been getting worse each year it's because it has. We have to stop and wonder if these fires are an early alarm of what we have been warned about for so long, and recognize that this is just the beginning of the devastating effects of climate change.

This leads me to my first topic that I want to explore: climate change. I'm really excited for this because I feel like this is something that I should already be doing something about, but have been putting off time and time again, thinking that not using plastic straws is enough good doing to help the environment (it's not). With all these extreme weather events we have been experiencing, I have to wonder why there isn't more urgency in every person (myself included) or the government to stop the climate change we are causing. If we can see the direct affects already happening so early in the projected timeline, why aren't we freaking out about it? Is it that we don't see the ties between these extreme weather events and climate change, or that we don't think it will affect us personally? Or something else? There's clearly a lot to uncover in this subject, and I'm aiming to break down the main points in an easily digestible way and hopefully at the end of these learnings I'll be able to answer what I can do and should be doing to help the climate change issue. I heard someone say in a podcast recently “Climate change is here, it’s among us, and it’s happening", and boy do I feel it. Now lets figure out what we can do about it.
